.\" Manpage for smartgrep
.\" Contact the maintainers to correct errors or typos
.TH SMARTGREP 1 "January 2025" "smartgrep 3.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
smartgrep \- semantic code search with cross-references and usage analysis

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B smartgrep
[\fIquery\fR] [\fIoptions\fR]
.br
.B smartgrep
\-\-index
.br
.B smartgrep group list
.br
.B smartgrep group
\fIname\fR [\fIoptions\fR]
.br
.B smartgrep group add
\fIname\fR \fIterm1,term2,...\fR
.br
.B smartgrep group remove
\fIname\fR
.br
.B smartgrep refs
\fIterm\fR
.br
.B smartgrep changes
[\-\-compact]
.br
.B smartgrep
\-\-list\-groups

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B smartgrep
is a semantic code search tool that understands code structure and relationships.
Unlike traditional grep, it provides:
.IP \(bu 2
Usage counts showing how often code is referenced
.IP \(bu 2
Cross-references showing actual calling code
.IP \(bu 2
20+ built-in concept groups plus custom project-specific groups
.IP \(bu 2
Type-aware filtering (functions, classes, variables, etc.)
.IP \(bu 2
Advanced search patterns (AND, OR, NOT, regex)

.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B query
Search for a term or pattern in the codebase. Supports advanced patterns:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
\fIterm1\fR|\fIterm2\fR - OR search
.IP \(bu 2
\fIterm1\fR&\fIterm2\fR - AND search
.IP \(bu 2
!\fIterm\fR - NOT search (exclude term)
.IP \(bu 2
/\fIregex\fR/ - Regular expression search
.RE

.TP
.B \-\-index
Rebuild the semantic index. Run this after significant code changes or when
first using smartgrep on a new codebase.

.TP
.B group list
List all available concept groups (both built-in and custom).

.TP
.B group \fIname\fR
Search using a concept group. Available built-in groups include:
.B auth, api, error, database, cache, user, payment, config, test, async,
.B service, flow, architecture, import, interface, state, event, logging,
.B security, build, deploy

.TP
.B group add \fIname\fR \fIterm1,term2,...\fR
Add a custom concept group with the specified terms. Custom groups are saved
to \fI.curatorconfig.json\fR in your project root.

.TP
.B group remove \fIname\fR
Remove a custom concept group.

.TP
.B refs \fIterm\fR
Show all references to a specific term, including cross-references and
impact analysis.

.TP
.B changes
Analyze the impact of uncommitted changes in your git repository. Shows which
symbols have been modified and what files depend on them, helping assess risk
before committing.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-help, \-h
Display help information and exit.

.TP
.B \-\-index
Rebuild the semantic index. Use this after significant code changes.

.TP
.B \-\-list\-groups
Show all available concept groups with their keywords (deprecated, use 'group list').

.TP
.B \-\-type \fItypes\fR
Filter results by declaration type. Can specify multiple types separated by commas.
Available types: \fBfunction\fR, \fBclass\fR, \fBvariable\fR, \fBstring\fR,
\fBcomment\fR, \fBimport\fR

.TP
.B \-\-file \fIpatterns\fR
Filter by file patterns (supports wildcards). Example: *.service.*

.TP
.B \-\-max \fInumber\fR
Maximum number of results to show (default: 50).

.TP
.B \-\-exact
Exact match only (disable fuzzy matching).

.TP
.B \-\-regex
Treat the search query as a regular expression.

.TP
.B \-\-no\-context
Hide surrounding code context in results.

.TP
.B \-\-sort \fIby\fR
Sort results by: \fBrelevance\fR (default), \fBusage\fR, \fBname\fR, or \fBfile\fR.

.TP
.B \-\-json
Output results as JSON for machine processing.

.TP
.B \-\-compact, \-c
Use compact output format (one line per result).

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B smartgrep "handleAuth"
Find all occurrences of handleAuth with usage information.

.TP
.B smartgrep group auth
Search for all authentication-related patterns.

.TP
.B smartgrep "error&string"
Find strings containing "error" (AND search).

.TP
.B smartgrep "login|signin|auth"
Find any of these terms (OR search).

.TP
.B smartgrep "!test" \-\-type function
Find functions that don't contain "test".

.TP
.B smartgrep group api \-\-type class \-\-max 10
Find top 10 API-related classes.

.TP
.B smartgrep refs "PaymentService"
Show all references to PaymentService.

.TP
.B smartgrep group error \-\-sort usage
Find error handling patterns sorted by usage.

.TP
.B smartgrep group add payments charge,bill,invoice,transaction
Add a custom concept group for payment-related terms.

.TP
.B smartgrep group payments \-\-type function
Search for payment-related functions using your custom group.

.TP
.B smartgrep group list
Show all available concept groups (built-in and custom).

.TP
.B smartgrep group remove payments
Remove the custom payments group.

.TP
.B smartgrep changes
Analyze impact of uncommitted changes, showing risk assessment and affected files.

.TP
.B smartgrep changes \-\-compact
Get a one-line risk assessment of your changes.

.SH CONCEPT GROUPS
Concept groups provide semantic pattern matching:

.TP
.B auth
Authentication patterns: login, jwt, token, oauth, permission, role

.TP
.B api
API patterns: endpoint, route, controller, REST, GraphQL

.TP
.B error
Error handling: exception, catch, throw, fail, invalid

.TP
.B database
Database patterns: query, model, repository, migration, ORM

Use \fB\-\-list\-groups\fR to see all available groups.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I .curator/semantic-index.json
Cached semantic index for fast searching.

.TP
.I .curatorconfig.json
Project configuration file containing custom concept groups and other settings.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SMARTGREP_MAX_RESULTS
Override default maximum results (default: 50).

.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disable colored output.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success
.TP
.B 1
General error or no results found
.TP
.B 2
Invalid arguments or options

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR grep (1),
.BR ripgrep (1),
.BR ag (1)

.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/RLabs-Inc/codebase-curator/issues

.SH AUTHOR
Written by RLabs Inc. and Claude.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright © 2025 RLabs Inc. License: MIT
.br
This is free software; you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.