.\" Manpage for monitor
.\" Contact the maintainers to correct errors or typos
.TH MONITOR 1 "January 2025" "monitor 1.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
monitor \- real-time incremental indexing monitor for codebase analysis

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B monitor
.I command
[\fIoptions\fR] [\fIproject-path\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B monitor
is a real-time monitoring tool that tracks file changes and maintains an
incremental semantic index of your codebase. It provides live dashboards,
codebase analytics, and detailed status reporting.

The tool watches for file system changes and automatically updates the
semantic index, providing instant feedback about code modifications and
maintaining an up-to-date view of your codebase structure.

.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B watch [\-\-overview] [\fIproject-path\fR]
Start real-time monitoring of file changes. Shows basic change statistics
by default. With \fB\-\-overview\fR flag, displays a live dashboard with
codebase analytics that updates on file changes.

.TP
.B monitor [\-\-overview] [\fIproject-path\fR]
Alias for the \fBwatch\fR command. Provides the same functionality.

.TP
.B overview [\fIproject-path\fR]
Generate a static snapshot of the codebase structure and analytics.
Shows code distribution, complexity metrics, architectural patterns,
and identifies code hotspots.

.TP
.B status [\fIproject-path\fR]
Display detailed technical status including index integrity, storage
statistics, and activity metrics.

.TP
.B rebuild [\fIproject-path\fR]
Force a complete rebuild of the semantic index. Useful after major
refactoring or if index corruption is suspected.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-overview, \-o
When used with \fBwatch\fR or \fBmonitor\fR commands, enables the live
overview dashboard that shows real-time codebase analytics alongside
file change monitoring.

.TP
.B \-\-help
Display help information and usage examples.

.SH OVERVIEW DASHBOARD
The live overview dashboard (enabled with \fB\-\-overview\fR) displays:

.IP \(bu 2
Real-time file change tracking with unique file counts
.IP \(bu 2
Code distribution by declaration type (functions, classes, etc.)
.IP \(bu 2
Files ranked by semantic complexity
.IP \(bu 2
Recent change activity log
.IP \(bu 2
Automatic refresh every 2 seconds

.SH CODEBASE ANALYSIS
The \fBoverview\fR command provides insights including:

.IP \(bu 2
Total indexed entries and file counts
.IP \(bu 2
Distribution of code by type (functions, classes, variables, etc.)
.IP \(bu 2
Most complex files by declaration count
.IP \(bu 2
Architectural pattern detection
.IP \(bu 2
Code hotspots (most referenced items)
.IP \(bu 2
Potential entry points identification

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B monitor watch
Start basic real-time monitoring of the current directory.

.TP
.B monitor watch \-\-overview
Start monitoring with live dashboard showing codebase analytics.

.TP
.B monitor watch \-o /path/to/project
Monitor a specific project with live overview enabled.

.TP
.B monitor overview
Generate a static analysis snapshot of the current directory.

.TP
.B monitor status
Show detailed technical status and integrity information.

.TP
.B monitor rebuild
Force rebuild the semantic index from scratch.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I .curator/semantic-index.json
The semantic index containing analyzed code information.

.TP
.I .curator/semantic/hashtree.json
Hash tree for efficient file change detection.

.SH STATISTICS
The monitor tracks various metrics:

.IP \(bu 2
Total file change events
.IP \(bu 2
Unique files modified/added/deleted
.IP \(bu 2
Runtime duration
.IP \(bu 2
Reindex operations count
.IP \(bu 2
Index integrity status

.SH ARCHITECTURE DETECTION
The tool can identify common architectural patterns:

.IP \(bu 2
Object-oriented (high class to function ratio)
.IP \(bu 2
Functional programming (high function to class ratio)
.IP \(bu 2
Strong TypeScript typing (many interfaces/types)

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success
.TP
.B 1
General error
.TP
.B 130
Interrupted by user (Ctrl+C)

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disable colored output in the dashboard.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR smartgrep (1),
.BR codebase-curator (1)

.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/RLabs-Inc/codebase-curator/issues

.SH AUTHOR
Written by RLabs Inc. and Claude.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright © 2025 RLabs Inc. License: MIT
.br
This is free software; you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.